---
title: "The implications of overshooting 1.5°C on Earth system tipping elements - a review"
collection: publications_preprints
permalink: /publications/preprints/ritchie-2026
citation: "Ritchie*, P. D. L., Steinert*, N. J., Abrams, J. F., Alkhayuon, H., Arnscheidt, C. W., Bochow, N., Chapman, R. R., Clarke, J., Dennis, D. P., Donges, J. F., Flores, B. M., <b>Garbe, J.</b>, Högner, A., Huntingford, C., Lenton, T. M., Lohmann, J., Lux-Gottschalk, K., Milkoreit, M., Möller, T., Pearce-Kelly, P., Pereira, L., Quinn, C., Schleussner, C.-F., Stuenzi, S. M., Swingedouw, D., Van der Laan, L. N., Zickfeld, K., Wunderling*, N.: <i>The implications of overshooting 1.5°C on Earth system tipping elements - a review</i>, Environmental Research Letters, accepted, DOI: <a href='https://doi.org/10.31223/X5273K'>10.31223/X5273K</a> [preprint], 2026. *These authors contributed equally to this work."
doi: 10.31223/X5273K
date: 2026-01-21
venue: "Environmental Research Letters"
---

## Abstract
Due to insufficient emission reductions in recent years, it is increasingly likely that global warming will exceed the 1.5 °C temperature limit in the coming decades. As a result, several Earth system tipping elements could, at least temporarily, have their tipping points surpassed, posing risks of large-scale and profound structural change. Tipping does not always occur immediately upon crossing such a critical threshold. If, in the following decades, global mean temperatures can be reduced below such long-term critical levels, tipping could still be avoided. An improved understanding is therefore needed of whether tipping remains avoidable, for which systems, and under what conditions. Here, we review how minimising the magnitude and duration of any temperature overshoot beyond 1.5°C is vital to minimising tipping risks. Limiting both the magnitude and duration of any overshoot beyond 1.5 °C is vital for reducing tipping risks. Tipping elements with fast response times, such as warm-water coral reefs, are especially vulnerable to overshoot. In contrast, those with slow response times, such as polar ice sheets, may be less sensitive to temporary overshoot. Potential interactions between tipping elements and additional human pressures, such as deforestation in the Amazon or pollution and disruption of coral reef habitats, may further lower tipping points, narrowing the range of overshoot trajectories that can still avoid it. The vulnerability of many tipping elements, even under shorter overshoot conditions, underscores that global warming must peak below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels, return to below 1.5 °C as quickly as possible (i.e., within this century), and to around 1 °C thereafter.